Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Danielle Rodriguez. She's an
invited assistant professor at University of Catholic Portuguese, where
she teaches master students about the cognitive foundations of
language. She studies gestural communication. Human and nonhuman primates.
And today we're going to talk about exactly that
communication in non-human pri and non-human apes, gestures, child-directed
communication, language, and some other related topics. So Daniela,
welcome to the show. It's always, it's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. Thank you for the invitation, and
it's a real pleasure to be here. So, uh,
let,
let me start by asking you, which kind of
non-human apes have you studied the most just to
uh have a little bit of background here.
So actually, I, I was lucky enough to, to
study lots of different primates. Uh, IT was mostly
behavior studies, uh, but I studied some lemurs, um,
also some crabby eating macaques, mandrills, uh, and then
also chimpanzees, uh, and I focus mostly on, on
chimpanzees during my PhD and even a bit before
my PhD I already started like collecting data in
chimpanzees, yes. And
what kinds of,
yeah,
yeah, sure, sure. No, no, no worries. What kinds
of communication do you study in non-human apes?
Um, SO I, so most of my work is
in gestures, so usually researchers in private communication study
vocalizations, uh, facial expressions or gestures, and early work
was just focused on each modality. Uh, LAST decades,
I would say that people tend to to study
these different modalities together, at least having those, uh,
this modality into account. Um, SO most of my
work is in gestures, but we have like, I,
I've been collecting also data in vocalizations and facial
expressions. So my first studies have all these modalities
into account and then I specialize in in gestural
research.
So what kind of gestures do you study in
nonhuman apes?
Um, SO, mostly it's, um, it's a bit different
from human research because we study like all body
gestures and we we use a different methodology like
uh different names, I would say it's an approach
that is more descriptive, uh, so, um, it's basically
we have lots of uh uh things in common.
Um, BUT the way we address gestures in human
research and in human research, it's a bit different.
So what I try to do, and because I
study also humans, adjusters in humans, I use the
same approach and I use the this descriptive approach
that is more common in primates, and I use
the these same names, this same approach to study
both. So, for example, we, it's only a subset
of the gestures that we have in humans. I'm
aware that In human research uh in the gesture
domain, um, we have lots of different things, um,
but for example, in nonhuman primates, we tend to
be more cautious in Uh, interpreting, for example, gestures
or uh to consider it a gesture in the
first place. So we study a subset of these
gestures, uh, for example, the ones that are communicative,
the intentional gestures, the ones that involve a change
in the behavior of the recipient. So of course
we know that we cover only a small part
of the gestural world, uh, but I would say
that most of the research in a human primates,
it's this subset of gestures.
So I know that you've studied greetings and leave
taking. So what are they?
So greetings and leave takings are basically the little
rituals that we do, uh, when we say hello,
like say hello and goodbye to people when we
meet or when we are about to leave. Um,
SO I studied those kind of rituals, uh, the
the signals that are changed during the arrivals and
departures. Uh, IN one of one community of chimpanzees.
So we had like a really great setting where
you have like this outdoor laboratory where they would
go there to to crack some nuts and uh
they would uh join uh others that were already
there, for example, and they will live also at
different times, so it's, it was a perfect setting
to to check if they greet each other or
if they say goodbye. Um, AND yeah, basically it's
So it's hard to tell if they actually are,
if I arrive up to a place and say
hello, or if I just saying how the weather
is like outside, like in other place, it's hard
to tell what is a greeting or not. So,
of course, we, at least in our study, what
we did is considering all the signals that are
changed during the arrivals or during departures, but of
course, this doesn't mean that our greetings are Uh,
leave takings, you know, so then we have like
some challenges and probably we'll talk about this a
bit later. Um, BUT yeah, it's basically these kind
of signals that we change when we meet someone
or when we are about to leave.
But how do you go about studying these kinds
of gestures? I mean, how do you know that
when they do a particular kind of gesture, they're
doing a greeting or a leave taking?
Yeah, so this is the first challenge. So we
have actually considered and we have lots of variability
uh in definitions if you check in the literature,
um, and this is quite challenging because then we
if you want to to know. If this species
of, if it's like some greetings reported in this
community, for example, the way people define a greeting,
uh, it's quite different from, for example, other research
groups and sometimes it's a bit hard then to
compare results in different communities in different, even in
the same species if the research is conducted by
different people. So this is the first challenge like
about the definition. So some people consider a greeting
even if For example, chimpanzees or other animals, if
they are already present, but they approach other individuals
a bit closer, and they could greet each other.
So like the signals if it is changed during
that um interaction. But other ones will involve like
uh they, they would need to, to have like
um a separation, a physical separation in the, the
physical space, I would say. So for more, for
example, than 5 minutes, others like it's more than
1 hour absent. So, of course, this will also
uh will imply different interpretations and results. Um, LEAVE
takings, it's another story because it's not very uh
studied, um, but even for, for the, but the
challenges are are similar. I would say because greetings
are a bit more studied and involve what are
the types of signals that we already know a
bit about the functions and how they are so
important in maintaining and keeping relationships. Uh, IT'S, it's
somehow easier, but we face similar problems because sometimes
we tend to overinterpret some, some of the things,
uh, and for example, the leave takings, uh. We
are not sure sometimes if we, even for, we
are very cautious about uh the, the signals and
choosing the signals um that are changed that we
can consider a gesture, for example, or not, um,
and I, I would say that we cannot be
super sure about. ABOUT the nature of the justice.
Firstly, first of all, because it's um the clarity
in nature, so if I say goodbye, I don't
expect also that the others will change the behavior
and uh Well, uh, it, it basically the, the,
the, the communication that the gesture communication studies usually,
uh, as I mentioned before, focus on the subset
of communication that imply, uh, changing the commun changes
in the behavior uh of the recipient, they imply
intentional uh criteria, so lots of different things that
sometimes it's hard to tell, you know taking if
these are occurring or not, right? Mhm.
And uh in chimpanzee, fusion fusion societies which you've
studied, how do these gestures work? And by the
way, what is a fusion fusion society?
Uh, SUFFICIENT fusion societies are, uh, societies like when
individuals basically come and go, uh, pretty often, so,
so they don't spend all the time together and
uh this is actually super important because of course,
to understand a bit the the role of greetings
and risk takings because if in one community, um,
you spend all the time together, maybe greetings and
risk takings are not so important, right? Uh, BUT
in your like in your community, if you come
and go pretty often, sometimes you can spend, uh,
like a few hours or days without seeing the
other individuals. Um, OF course, things happen, uh, outside,
like, uh, and you'll probably meet other individuals, and
it's super important, if greetings are so important to
maintain and Uh, to, to check social relationships among
each other, um, it's in these moments they invest
a lot, uh, not only to to greet and
to be able to check if they were standing
in the same place as they before the other
individuals also to inform the other one's present. So
they have a very important role in these societies
when they don't. Uh, THEY, they're not together all
the time.
Yeah. And so I, I read in your work
that there are some contextual and social factors that
play a role in who, when, and how chimpanzees
greet. Uh, TELL us about that.
Um, SO one important thing, uh, to start with
is that Uh, they don't greet all the time.
Like, even if they, so they arrive to a
place and we probably would assume that they will
at least say hello to 11 present and actually
in our study we've seen that in half, more
than a bit more than half of the cases,
um they Didn't greet anyone, so it happens sometimes
they just arrive and they start nuts and do
other behaviors and so this is also important just
to have uh to have this in mind, um,
but then of course if they arrive to a
place and there is like a group of chimpanzees,
they don't greet everyone present, so they are super
selective in the ones that are uh greeting. Usually
it's high ranking individuals or um or males or
a specific individual for some reason because of course
there is all these contacts about what happened before
or the mood of the group, if they are
aroused or not. So of course there's like all
these things that they have into account and sometimes
for us as a researcher, it is very difficult
to, to have, of course, we collect data on
most of the things that we can uh collect,
but sometimes if they It's impossible. We are not
following them 24 hours and it's hard to complete
the puzzle of the, the social complexity they they
have. Um, BUT yeah, I, I, I think at
least, uh, knowing, uh. We, we know that um
this social complexity has of like their lives plays
in super important role, um, and we do our
best, but it's it's hard like to To tell,
I would say, I don't know if we are
going into this a bit later, but uh so
for example, as I said before, so the, the
ones they choose to greet, it's one of the
important things, and sometimes they choose not to greet
at all. Different, uh, individuals, but so these social
uh rules they have in the group. So for
example, hierarchy plays an important role. So, uh, the
kinship, um, so they also will, depending on the
relationship they have with each individual, they, they may
choose, for example, OK, this is a friend or
a kin like it's, I, I have like A
more predictable outcome if I would communicate with my
friend. So maybe I will invest a bit more
in greeting like one male that I'm not so
confident if, if, if it's OK with me approaching,
you know. Um, SO I would say that these
contextual factors that I mentioned before, like arousal, what
happened before, for how long they don't see each
other, but also these social relations between them, and
also another important thing, it's like the audience, like
the ones. Present or not, sometimes they get more
confident, for example, if they could have like some
friends, uh, some allies nearby, of course, or they
may feel a bit insecure if there's like my
males or high ranking individuals there, and maybe they
would prefer not to greet anyone present or, you
know.
Yeah. So you mentioned social rank there. I have
here uh somewhat of a list of other factors
which I read about in your work. How about
kinship? I mean, do chimpanzees tend to greet uh
other chimpanzees who are genetically related to them?
Um, SO usually what we've seen at least in
this study is that they are not investing much
inbreeding. Uh, YEAH, if they are, uh, their kidneys,
like if there's like someone uh related to them,
um, they usually prefer to invest, invest the greetings
in other, um. Non-related individuals. So it was quite
and it's why we think that maybe about the
this uncertainty of the outcomes, so chimpanzees sometimes get
pretty aggressive and I've seen in some videos that
I analyzed that, so for example, if someone would
greet. A male that is not very high ranking
and the alpha male is nearby, uh, you would
be like someone just because, OK, you beat this
male first, you know, so they are a bit
uh so aggressive sometimes depending on the situations, um,
but so for example, if they have a More
close relationship, even if it's not kin, uh, I,
I only focused or only coded these relationships if
they were or not related, but also we, we
see this in, in more close individuals. So if
they are friends, if they spend more time together,
uh, they are kind of more tolerant to each
other and it's not super important to signal, uh,
that I, my friendly intent of coming by, you
know, so we didn't see um. IN terms of
um frequency of greetings, um, much greetings with related
individuals.
Uh, HOW about, uh, their, their position as a
traveler or party member? Does that influence the way
they red?
We also didn't find evidence for that. So, for
example, I don't know, in some cultures also this
in humans these varies, so maybe, of course, in
chimpanzees and it's one thing that I want to
mention, so this was only in one community, um,
in, in Western African chimpanzees, so we also need
to be aware that this can vary a lot
in different communities. But at least in this study,
we didn't find evidence. So if it was the
one that was already in the party, like in
the group, or the one that was joining the
group that was greeting or not, so we didn't
find any evidence and, for example, in some cultures,
maybe in human cultures, it's more common than the
one that is arriving, for example, that is the
one that is greeting, um, but here, yeah, we
didn't find and the same for example, so we
focused on Not only the communication of this individual
when arriving, but we studied them to be able
to address the, the selective nature of their greetings,
we studied all the possible interactions between that individual
and the other ones present. Uh, IF they were
traveling together, even uh or separated by 5 minutes
or 10 minutes or wherever we were studying. The
behavior like the possible communication occurring during these individuals
with everyone, and to be able to say, OK,
they were preferring to to communicate with this individual,
um, and also, for example, if they were traveling
together or separated by a short amount of time,
they would not greet those uh those chimpanzees. So
it was this uh travel or party member position
and also the this possibility of being traveling together
that didn't have an impact.
Mhm. I also read about the level of potential
threat, but what constitutes, first of all, what constitutes
a potential threat in these kinds of societies and
then how does it influence uh greeting?
Um, SO, mostly, um, we, we address this by
different contexts, and so, and the level of arousal
we consider so when they were super aroused, if
there was like a fight before, like usually agonistic
contexts and sexual contexts, they also get really aroused.
Um, AND it's where we consider, we only divided
in three general levels, uh, so high arousal, neutral,
and low arousal, and these, uh, constitutes so that
the, the high arousal would constitute mostly agonistic and
sexual context, for example, neutral would be. Uh, FEEDING,
resting, like the things that are most often don't
involve much uh social interactions, but, um, although they
are all engaging in the same place doing the
same thing, and low arousal would be some affiliative
contacts, for example, they, they were pretty more uh
relaxed, I would say. And so, and this is
how this impact greetings, um, we see that these
neutral contexts and we would expect for that. Um,
THEY, they usually don't, uh, in the terms of
frequency, they don't involve much greetings like we've seen
that in. Uh, IN, in the exchange of signals.
So in our, uh, arousal context, they would change
more often, uh, signals and also when they are
pretty relaxed, it's also like a safe place sometimes
to change more signals. So it's like either I
arousal or uh. Low arousal and then the way
they greet will vary. So of course, if they
are super nervous, for example, what we see more,
they will use lots of vocalizations, um, and when
they are a bit more relaxed, they would use
more gestures, for example. Um, BUT in greetings in
general, I would say, and one of the most
known signals exchange and here in our study too
is the pangrams, this vocalization that is also high,
um, connected to the, the dominance in the, the
ranks of the individuals, usually it's the lower ranking
individuals that um vocalize towards high ranking, uh, and
this was one of the most um the the
signals most uh present in our study. Mhm.
Uh, THIS is something that you mentioned briefly earlier,
but how about the presence of mature males? How
do they influence, uh, greetings?
Um, So it's the same in our study, it
was the same trend that there was like also
reported in a pangrant studies, like also greeting studies,
but with this vocalization I mentioned before, and there
was like this inhibitory effect. So when there were
like other metro males present or high ranking individuals,
um, they tended to to greet less. So yeah,
but at least, so we always measure this. Possibility
to greet one of the opportunity to greet each
individual. So in terms of this big pool, we
found that they can inhibitory effect that was already
reported to penmans, but here in our study because
we included all vocalizations, also facial expressions and gestures,
we found that the same front. Yeah.
So that's about chimpanzees. What about humans? What do
we know about the greetings and leave takings in
human societies?
Uh, SO there is a lot of variation in
culture, so I would say it's universal because you
can see it like across the globe, um, and,
but the way people greet each other or they,
they say goodbye to each other, it varies a
lot. Um, SO for example, Even the the the
same thing that I mentioned before, if I arrived
to a place, maybe I may choose to greet
just one person or everyone, um, maybe I don't,
uh, in some cultures they don't, and we can,
I think I will see this later, they don't
uh address children, for example, or they will, they
can just greet the chief of the tribe, you
know, or so the way, so there are also
differences in. The people you choose to greet when
you arrive at place or to say goodbye, but
also in terms of uh the signals you change.
So we, we also have this flexibility in the
same culture to use different signals depending on who
you greet. For example, of course, if I would
read maybe um A university professor might be a
bit more formal or different, um, if I, uh,
if I with a friend, of course, and even
if I with a friend like that I see
yesterday, uh, that it's, it's different from the, if
I see this the same friend like if I
didn't see him like in 3 years or 4,
so we have this ability to adjust our greetings.
In the same cultures, we do it differently. If
we compare cultures, we have even different signals, uh,
different, uh, choices and who we greet. So lots
of, uh, I would say lots of different uh
uh variations of greetings and the way we, we
say goodbye, uh, I would say it's, it works
the same um in the same way. Uh, I
think both have a super important function of, uh,
also maintaining, as I mentioned before, for the chimpanzees,
um, maybe, of course, not in the same extent,
but they also inform people about social relationships, so
people around if I had someone and uh give
a handshake to another one, they will notice that
my relationship will be different, right? Um. So I
think there is like some similarities in terms of
they are super important to keep social relationships and
uh to inform uh if there are like also
changes in the way uh you, we, we are
fission fusion societies as well, so you don't spend
all the time together. Some, some things may have
happened in your absence, so I think these moments
are also super important, as I mentioned before, for
the chimpanzees.
So it's, it's then the case that greetings and
leave takings, their presence is a human universal. I
mean, they occur across all human societies or at
least the ones that we've studied and then. Uh,
I mean, who we greet, when we greet, and
all of those other contextual factors. They vary cross
culturally and they are, I would imagine, very heavily
influenced by culture,
correct. Yeah, no, so basically, uh, uh, it's, it's
that like we've seen. Some of these, uh, the
things that you mentioned, so people would choose how
you greet, uh, and so if you compare across
cultures, one of the things that you see like
greeting and these takings are quite universal because they
occur, but the way they occur, the people who
greet or the people who decide to communicate is
quite different. So we can infer that this is
a universal behavior. And it's why it seems super
interesting to study the evolutionary origins of these behaviors,
and it's when you study uh other close or
phylogenetic relatives of the other great apes, or even
in other animals, it's also pretty uh studied and
these functions of keeping and maintaining social relationships plays
an important role. Um, SO, yeah, I think the
most interesting part of this is being able to
go back and say, OK. The way we, so
for example, there is like some signals like embrace
and kids that we also see in chimpanzees or
both. So there is when you study these uh
these gestures, for example, or some of the vocalizations,
of course it's a bit more different, but for
gestures in specific that I'm more focused on, uh,
it is quite nice to see that there is
like some of these signals that we also see
in humans. So what we can also some infer
when we compare. Humans and other great apes. If
you see similar behaviors that you can infer that
probably our last common ancestor had similar communicative um
registers or behaviors. So it's how we, you can
go back and take some of the things in
terms of uh. Evolutionary origins. Of course this is
always you, you cannot be sure, but it's how
we usually work and if you see in more
distant related species, um you can consider convergence evolution,
for example. Um, BUT yeah, I, I guess the,
the most interesting thing, so the most interesting thing
here is, uh, going back to study the evolution
of these, the, these rituals, the greetings and leave
takings and be able to infer probably our last
common ancestor also did these behaviors. So for greetings,
they are quite spread around the, the animal kingdom,
uh, so maybe it's it's super interesting just to
study more detailed, uh, uh. MORE details about the,
the signals. So for example, the, as I mentioned,
the types of signals, were they present maybe, you
know, and instead of general questions. Mhm.
So I also read in your work that individuals
both in non-human apes and in humans learn to
adjust their communication during their development. I mean, why
do they do that? Why, what is the social
importance of that?
Um, SO if, if you think uh about uh
primates in general, we have like, um, uh, a
long period of uh in which we are dependent
on our mothers and caregivers. So it's a safe
place to learn, right? So there is no this
social pressure, um, or we are safe. Um, BECAUSE
our mothers would protect us. So I would say
humans in general, of course, but I, I was
thinking more about the chimpanzees now, uh, but you
have like a long period in which you are
able to learn from your environment, from the social
relationships, um, and to pick how the social rules,
the social rules, and the same works for the
communication. So to be able to survive and navigate
this complex world, the social complex world that I
mentioned before. You need to know how these things
work. And when you are super young, because you
are protected uh by your mother, you can just
learn from the environment, right? Uh, AND the communication
is the same thing. Of course, um, they will
learn by the surrounding environment and we can talk
about this a bit later, um, but also the
way Mothers and other individuals address their in their
infants or immature individuals could be also be different.
Um, BUT all these adaptations, I would say that
they are super important to survive. So if an
individual is able to adjust their communication. Uh, DEPENDING
on the situation, so for example, if a, if
a chimp will uh exaggerate their signals to attract
the attention of a female, uh, they will probably
be more successful in this sexual context, for example,
or if there is like some aggression going on,
maybe I. Able to adjust the communication and to
have a more silent register but maybe I can
survive a bit more. So this is very the
ability to adjust the communication to different contexts, to
different individuals. I would say that it's super important
to survive in the group and to be accepted
by the group and to navigate these. Hierarchies to
have some allies that are super important. And during
the development is the way that you can learn
how things work. And then the way you learn,
of course, and for example, in humans we have
this active learning, um or active teaching in chimpanzees
is a bit different, but here I would say
it's more, uh, maybe, yeah, it's what we will
talk now about this kind of child or mature.
Um, COMMUNICATION, directed communication. So the way we, the
way infant learns or immature individuals learn these things
might differ a bit between if you compare humans
and other apes. Mhm.
So let's get then into child-directed communication. What is
it and which pieces have you studied it in?
Um, SO I studied in, in chimpanzees, like again,
so my, my PG was focused on the accommodate
that our ability to adjust our language, um, that
our communication, and so I did these studies in
greetings and takings, but also then I focused on
uh child directed communication, and here I studied in
how this ability emerge in our ontogeny in humans,
and also, uh, so in chimpanzees in general, if
This register, this register is present or not uh
in chimpanzees, and for that, so I focus, I
collect data on uh toddlers, so in humans in
different groups of toddlers and uh in chimpanzees I
study two groups, two different communities.
Um, AND what forms of child directed communication can
we find then in chimpanzees?
Um, SO I focused again on these studies were
mainly focused on gestures, um, I guess I, I,
I, I said it before, but, um, so why
these interesting gestures in particular, because although we see
lots of vocalizations and facial expressions, and of course
we have all this into account, even if we
study just as we collect some general information about
these other modalities. Um, BUT in terms of the
evolutionary origins of language and communication, there's especially interested
in studying gestures because they look more flexible. Then
vocalizations and facial expressions. I'm not saying that they
are not flexible. They are the modalities they, they
are, and studies that are coming and we need
technology, we, we see that they actually are pretty
flexible, but compared to the complexity we see in
human speech, um, we were all the researchers were
looking for some of these features and they failed
like when analyzing vocalizations, for example, in facial expressions,
they would say they were more um Tied to
emotional states. Um, SO we, we see more flexibility
in gestures and it was in gestures that I
focused my research for the child art of communication
and like in in toddlers. It's super important, these
um developmental stage where before they they learn how
to speak properly, they use a lot, they rely
a lot on gestures. So I was focusing on
gestures, uh, the gestures they use, and look at
if they were adjusting when they were communicating with
younger toddlers, for example. Um, AND for the chimpanzees,
I was more interested also in gestures, um, focusing
on gestures, but More general, more generally speaking, if
they were adjusting also their gestures, but finer uh
features of, of gestures because we already know that
uh There are some infant directed gestures uh in
other great tapes like in gorillas, orangutans, chimpanzees, um,
they exist, but and there's like some general features.
So for example, in gorillas, the mothers and will
use more repetitive uh sequences with tactile elements, for
example, or in in chimpanzees we know that. This
tactile modality is more present when they are young
and they use visual gestures and silent gestures when
they grow older. Um, SO we already know that
it is some kind of infant directed uh communication,
uh, but not in the same way, so never
was uh in, in the literature we didn't find
any evidence for these finer grained features of, uh,
child directed communication that we studied in humans. So
for example, What is uh child directed communication is
like this register that we use when we talk
with the babies and infants. Uh, SO we change
our pitch, our like the frequency, the rhythm or
like the temporal patterns, so we tend to, to
communicate slower with more pauses and using different speech
as I mentioned before, repeating more. And it's like
this kind of detail that it's not studied so
often in, in other red tapes. Um, IT'S what,
so in our study we focus more on these
like temporal patterns, the repetitions as well. We looked
the complexity of the vocabulary like as we tend
to use simple vocabulary when we address children we
also look at these in both. So I use
similar methodologies for the toddlers and for the chimpanzees,
but not to compare. One thing, so in one
study I was focusing on the emergence of these
uh uh register of mother is uh in, in
humans to see if they were already present in
our gesture modality before being able to speak properly,
and in the other study was to see if
there were at all present these features, these finer
brain features in chimpanzees.
Right. Uh, AND so in terms of the gestures
that are directed at, uh, children in, in the
case of chimpanzees, what characterizes them and how do
they differ from the ones that are directed at
adults?
Uh, SO in chimpanzees you mentioned, right? Um, So
I would say that the So the first part
of our study was actually compared like uh how
females, so we focus on females, would communicate with
other adults compared to infants. So for example, to
see if there was a different register. um, AND
we found some differences, um, specifically, uh, uh, I
think. It it was a bit surprising because it
was not the same, the same thing that we've
seen in humans. So, mostly they were um In
humans, what we see, they simplify the vocabulary, they
use a slower written and in our case in
chimpanzees, they were using shorter gestures. So for example,
when communicating with younger individuals, and this is a
bit counterintuitive, um, because actually if you need, if
they, they would have like the same function like
the child direct communication to Uh, facilitate, uh, communicative,
uh, uh, functions. Um, YOU would expect they would
use slower rhythm, like a slower pace, they would,
uh, the gesture duration would be longer as well,
but it's not what we've seen, so they, at
least the shorter gestures were one of the our
findings and it was quite surprising, yeah.
So when it comes to mother offspring pairs, do
mothers adjust their communication based on their offspring developmental
stage and their sex?
Um, So yes and no for some of the
things. So for the age, we've seen some results,
yes, and I'll go to that, uh, I'll go
back to that later, but, uh, so for example,
one of the things that we've seen that there
was like no effect of the sex of the
offspring. And so why in the first place we
also were interesting to to know if they were,
they would adjust. First of all, because it's already
reported that the mothers will adjust their social uh
sociality, so they will Adjust their behavior according to
the sex of the offspring. So we were thinking
maybe they also adjust their communication. And also we
know that young um immature males, for example, um,
in chimpanzees, they will have a like uh in
terms of just the repertoire, and it's reported that
it's, it's larger than the females, but so we
were thinking like maybe here there is like some
communicative adaptation as well, but we didn't. Find anything
regarding the sex. So we think that maybe they
already adjust their behavior and that's big enough. So
probably they create more opportunity. So if I, if
they have a um infant male as a um
That, so, first of all, sorry, uh, because sometimes
I assume that uh you already know this, but
males will stay in the same community. Most of
the males will stay in the same community when
they um when they grow up and stay in
the, the hierarchy of that group, but females tend
to migrate, so. This is also an important thing
to consider why would expect differences uh in the
sex of the individuals. Um, AND mothers with uh
male offspring, they would, uh, or what we reported
is that they end up like hang out like
more uh with the group of the, the chimpanzees,
the community, they make more effort to be socially
involved in other activities and compared to when they
have female offspring. But in terms of gestures, we
didn't see any difference. So we think that maybe
they have even the differences in the gesture, the
size of the repertoire might have to do with
these more opportunities that males, young males have to
socialize because mothers will make this extra effort to,
to, to be around more individuals. Uh, BUT so
for the sex, we didn't find anything and for
the age as I mentioned before, um, so we
had like this effect. So first, when we analyzed
females to communication to adults and other individuals to
adults and to young individuals, we saw that trend,
but when we analyzed the subset of mother offspring,
we also found repetition. Uh, THAT is also a
common feature study in mothers, and we, but also
again, the opposite trend. They were repeating more often
to all their offspring. So usually we, when we
are talking uh to young kids, we tend to
repeat a lot like because this helps right like
the facilitates language acquisition. Uh, SO we are also
expecting that maybe they would repeat a bit more
when addressing uh. Immatures, like younger immatures, but we
didn't find that fun.
Right. And is mother is or this kind of
uh child-directed uh communication that we humans have, um,
is it a human universal?
Um, SO yes, it's a bit similar to what
you asked me about the greetings. Um, SO you
see across the globe, so you would say this
is universal in. The weird like the Western, it's
like the weird cultures, right, like the western, uh,
compared to the Western cultures, so you see a
lot of differences, but in general, when they address
kids, they, they change the way they communicate. Um,
SO what we can infer it's like it's present,
uh, in most of the cultures, at least it's
reported in most of the cultures, so we can
infer that it's universal, but then the way the
frequency. Uh, OF, for example, of, uh, the communication
that we direct to a child, it also varies
a lot in the the cultures, and the, the
things in our way we communicate that we adjust
it's also quite different. So in some cultures, for
example, they don't address so often the kids directly.
So, of course, this also varies, uh, and they
still learn, so we know that mother is is
super important to language acquisition, but the fact that
in these cultures. They don't address kids directly often,
and still they acquire the language. So they, they
can, and it's here where the surrounding environment is
super important, so they probably are picking up the
communication in the environment also to learn and to
make these models uh of, of language.
Right. So for the last part of our conversation
today, I have here just a few more general
questions to ask you. So when it comes to
establishing a connection between chimpanzees and humans in terms
of communication, would there be a connection through gestures
and also between gestures and language?
Um, YES, so in my work, what I, I
was focusing on was precisely that like the connection
that we can establish between like the evolution of
our language and specifically the evolution of uh our
communicative systems, and because of course the way you
define like language, human language is super complex, so
it helps us if we try. To establish the
origin of language, it's useful to, to try to
take apart the all these different components of language,
like to uh To, to try to put it
in simple terms and simple components that we then
can look at those things in other primates and
also most important, so using uh similar definitions, um
the similar methodologies, of course, this implies always to
have um At some adaptations because it's not possible
and here is where the challenge is, because sometimes.
The nature of communication is so different that we
need to do an adaptation here and there, but
keeping like uh comparable is super important because what
we've seen before is like some researchers, mostly that
are focused on human research do like use a
methodology that is not possible to apply in other
primates and vice versa, and then other people or
even the same researchers will compare. So the other
findings, but we are not comparing similar things, so
it's hard to also be fair in this comparisons.
So what we, we try to do, it's like
using Just so focusing here on justice because of,
yeah, the, the reasons that I mentioned before, the,
the fact that they are used in a flexible
and intentional way, so they are promising, promising modality
to, to study the evolution um of of our
language and because we also retain, so we also
use a lot of gestures in development and even
as I'm speaking, I'm using gestures, right? So, uh,
we, we are super interested in in Uh, in
gestures, but we try to address this in a
way that can be useful for this debate of
the evolution of language.
Right, uh, but I mean, cognitively speaking, there's definitely
a link between gestures and language,
right? Yes. Um, SO, uh. Gestures, uh, and I
was mentioning it like a bit earlier that in,
in other primates, we tend to, to just study
a a small subset of gestures. We know, um,
and this is just uh Because there is so
much uncertainty about, so if we study gestures in
adults, some of the things that we study in
these gestures, we can just ask, and it's much
easier to access to which part of the brains
are activated and Lots of different details that when
we, for example, we are studying other species or
even human infants, you cannot just ask or uh
be sure about certain things, about their intentions, about
even if they were uh about if they were
gesturing at all or not, so. Uh, THE approach
that like developmental psychologists use to study uh infants,
it's, uh, basically, or we have lots of as
permatologists have lots of influences of, uh, the, some
of the tools they use. So for example, to
study intentionality, we use uh similar uh criteria, um,
so I, I would say. Um, THAT'S. We, we
need to, to work like, of course, in the
same um using similar methodologies and as I mentioned
before, using similar tools, but then because it's also
not possible to use exactly the same tools, we
need to adapt. So it was this work that
we were Um, we're doing before, but uh, so
what I would say just disease was because we
are studying a small subset, but in humans, um,
we also gesture sometimes when we are alone, for
example, as a Uh, for example, it, it helps
us thinking about something. Uh, IF you forget about,
uh, about something, uh, that you need to remember
sometimes or where you put your keys or the
way that you did, sometimes we gesture and it's
not for a communicative purpose. So Uh, of course,
there is like this cognitive, uh, the functions of
these gestures, I would say they are a bit
different and it's hard to, to study in other
animals. So it's why when we are talking here
about gestures and these cognitive processes in gestures, I
would say that if we are just talking about
the comparisons of these uh or the evolution of
gestures, we are focusing still on these. This subset
that is more comparable, but it's super fascinating to
think that of course there are gestures also in
humans have different functions, may have different functions um
that are not studied there because it's so super
hard to address these other functions in other animals.
Mhm.
So one last question then I think. So, when
it comes to the cognitive and evolutionary foundations of
language and the link between gestures and language, at
this point in time, what do we know about
it?
So about the, can you just repeat the, uh,
yes, I, I mean, there, there's a, uh, as
we talked about, there's a link between gestures and
language. So, uh, in terms of the evolutionary and
cognitive foundations of language and through the link with
gestures, with gestures, what do we know about it?
Um, SO we know, um, that most of the
bits here what we mentioned a bit before, so
when we studied, uh, in other primates, uh, and
using similar methodologies, and if you, if you find
uh similar goals, similar Uh, the way they, they
use in the flexible way, um, so the intentionality
that I mentioned before, so all these properties are,
uh, things that are studied in in human language,
so we can assume that they were present in,
if they are present in these species, they would
be present in these last common ancestors. So if
we go back in the primate cage a bit
earlier and if we find these same features, we
can just For that uh these cognitive abilities and
these features of the communication were already present in
uh these uh common ancestors in uh in humans
in language because it's so complex, some of the
features that they are reported like to be maybe
exclusively uh found in humans. Um, SO, but it's
helpful then to to to understand. How we would
define, uh, is this defined in a way that
it's impossible to look in the first place to
other animals, in other animals. Um, SO first of
all, yeah, I think we need to, to To
make things like to to compose things and uh
uh to see, OK, we have this complex, complex
uh uh ability to communicate like using language that
involves this, and it's what researchers actually do, the
ones that are focusing on the evolution of communication,
and then they try to look into to address
these different things like nationality that I mentioned before,
how that you were using um The gestures in
this flexible ways, so using the same gesture in
different contexts and um These markers of intentionality, for
example, that I mentioned before, so already will uh
inform us that we had the intention to communicate
this to there. So these all these markers, I
would say um that can tell us when they
emerge in the primate image. And of course, as
I mentioned before, they could be also and they
are present in other animals and This can also,
um, bring us the conversion evolution scenario or even
if there are things that we are not finding
or the combination of these modality, these features are
not finding uh you know across the animal kingdom
besides humans, you, you can say that maybe they
emerge later, you know, only in humans. So I
think it's um. How we you usually address these
things in, in primate research or in animal communication
research.
Mhm. Great. So, I mean, would you like to
tell us what you're going to be working on
in the near future, a little bit more about
your current research?
Uh, SO now I'm, uh, this, uh, mother is
research, the child directed communication research, um, I'm uh
uh focusing a bit on, on that part right
now, trying to include other communities. So in our
lab, we had like this huge archive of uh
gestures in Different apes. So we are trying to
address the questions that I mentioned here before and
study these, uh, different, uh, these finer grained uh
features of mother is like vocabulary complexity, temporal patterns,
um. Also, the repetition the prominence of our communication
if you are exaggerating the way you communicating or
not. So I have these features that are already
addressed in these two communities of chimpanzees and we
are trying um to, to see if they are
also present in other uh in other apes, so
in other chimpanzees communities but also in bonobos and
gorillas, um to be able to also to make
this because we have like these promising results that
actually Uh, they are able to adjust their communication
to young individuals, but they are not doing it
the same way that we humans do. So they
have probably different function. Uh, PROBABLY relates with the
related with this, uh, active, uh, teaching that, uh,
that is not occurring in chimpanzees, so probably they
will prefer to invest in the other social relationships
around, um, and be more efficient with their own
infants and immatures because they will have time to
learn. So this trend that we've seen. Um, WE
don't, we are not sure if this disease is
just because of these two communities that we studied,
if it is like a general trend across the
chimpanzees, communities, or even if we can take back
this ability of adjusting our communication to younger individuals,
um, at an early stage in evolution. So if
they were present also in guerrillas or in bonobos,
we can take back the emergence of disability.
Great, so would you like to tell the audience
where they can find your work on the internet?
Well, actually, I don't have my, uh, I don't
have any specific channels, so I think I would
say Google Scholars and yeah, maybe the, the lab
web page, but yeah, I would say Google Scholar
is probably the place.
OK. So, Daniel, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
very, very informative conversation.
Thank you so much, Richard, and it was a
pleasure to be here.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin
Bronner, Douglas Fry, Francoortolotti Gabriel Ponscortezus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim
Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin,
David Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber,
Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew
Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.